GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away. On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Brussels in lockdown. Belgian
authorities remain on high alert
after a terrorist threat similar
to Paris. We look at what the
U.S. and others can and should
be doing to stop ISIS. Also
ahead, it's Politics Monday. We
look at how the politics of fear
is shaping the presidential
campaign. And could tobacco
plants be key to finding a
treatment for Ebola? KEVIN
WHALEY, Developed ZMapp: In a
vaccine, you give a person a
protein that stimulates your own
body to make antibodies. In this
case, we're giving antibodies
directly to you, so your body
doesn't have to make them. GWEN
IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK) GWEN IFILL: Police in
Belgium charged a fourth suspect
in the Paris attacks today. The
suspect was swept up in a
24-hour dragnet, but was the
only person charged. Fifteen
others were released. The prime
minister decided to keep
Brussels on its highest state of
alert through at least next
week. We have a report from Emma
Murphy of Independent Television
News in Brussels. EMMA MURPHY: A
European capital city, rush hour
Monday morning, whatever the
threat is, the government
believed it is so serious that
much of normal life has given
way to abnormality. Armored
vehicles patrol empty and closed
shopping streets. There are
soldiers on most junctions, and
in such a climate all places
where lots of people can gather,
like universities, schools and
nurseries, are shut. This isn't
a city in fear, but it is a city
in flux. MAN: It's necessary.
It's necessary to have this
security because the people, I
think, feel safer with this kind
of security. WOMAN: I feel if
the policeman -- but if I do
feel safe -- I will be glad when
I'm home. EMMA MURPHY: It is
affecting everyone's life,
mainly the small everyday things
like nursery for Nathaniel, fine
for one day, but challenging if
it goes on. CHARLOTTE MCDONALD
GIBSON, Belgium: We just can't
do the simple day-to-day things
that you usually do. And there's
police everywhere, even in my
neighborhood, which is quite
suburban, quite leafy. It's not
in the sort of center of town,
but there's police on the
streets. There's police cars
occasionally closing off the
roads around here. So it's very
unusual. EMMA MURPHY: How long
it goes on depends in part on
this man, Salah Abdeslam. He
still evades capture. He is part
of this terror threat, but the
action of the government here
suggests there is something for
than him for them to contend
with. GWEN IFILL: Because of
ongoing terrorist attacks around
the world, the State Department
issued a worldwide travel alert
for U.S. citizens this evening,
citing increased threats. It
directed Americans to -- quote
-- "exercise vigilance in public
places or when using public
transportation." It also
suggested avoiding large crowds,
particularly during the holiday
season. The alert is set to
expire in three months.
Meanwhile, in a southern suburb
of Paris, police said a street
cleaner found an explosive belt
in a pile of rubble, but without
its detonator. French President
Francois Hollande and British
Prime Minister David Cameron
each laid a single flower
outside the Bataclan concert
hall, where 89 people were
killed. Later, Cameron urged the
British Parliament to join
France in the fight against the
Islamic State. DAVID CAMERON,
British Prime Minister: Later
this week, I will set out in
Parliament our comprehensive
strategy for tackling ISIL. I
firmly support the action that
President Hollande has taken to
strike ISIL in Syria and it's my
firm conviction that Britain
should do so too. GWEN IFILL:
The French Defense Ministry said
it has launched its first
airstrikes from the aircraft
carrier Charles de Gaulle,
bombing Islamic State targets in
Ramadi and Mosul, Iraq. France
has already carried out strikes
against ISIS targets in Syria.
Syria was at the top of the
agenda for a meeting between
Russian President Vladimir Putin
and Iran's supreme leader,
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. The two
leaders met in Iran. Both have
been staunch supporters of
Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad, and today Khamenei
criticized U.S. efforts to begin
peace talks. Migrants stuck in
limbo along the Greek-Macedonian
border stepped up their protests
today, staging hunger strikes
and blocking trains. They're
mostly economic refugees who
have been denied entry by Balkan
countries because they're not
fleeing war. Hundreds gathered
behind gates and barbed-wire
fences, shouting at police.
Others taped or even sewed their
mouths shut in a sign of
protest. Flags flew at
half-staff in the West African
nation of Mali today to begin
three days of mourning for the
victims of Friday's attack on a
luxury hotel there. State
television aired photos of the
corpses of two of the suspected
gunmen, appealing for
information on their identities.
Three separate groups have
claimed responsibility for the
deadly siege that left 20
people, plus the two attackers,
dead. In Nigeria and Cameroon,
five suicide bombers, all girls,
killed 12 people over the
weekend. The attacks happened at
an entry to Nigeria's
northeastern city of Maiduguri,
and just across the border in
Cameroon. Police blamed Boko
Haram, the Islamic extremist
group whose six-year campaign of
violence has killed 20,000
people. Voters in Argentina have
ushered in a new era, electing
their first conservative
president in 12 years. Last
night, Mauricio Macri danced on
stage with his family at his
Buenos Aires headquarters. The
right-wing mayor of Buenos Aires
beat the ruling party's nominee
in a runoff, after promising to
boost the economy and fight
corruption. MAURICIO MACRI,
President-Elect of Argentina
(through translator): The
quality that we have, us
Argentineans, we have to finally
put it to work for our future. I
want to say to you today as well
as to our brothers of Latin
America and to our brothers of
the world that we want to have
good relationships with all the
countries. We want to work with
all of you. GWEN IFILL: Macri
takes office December 10. He
inherits a country with 30
percent inflation and stagnant
economic growth. Back in this
country, police in New Orleans
are trying to find out what
sparked a gun battle in a
crowded city park last night.
Hundreds had gathered for an
evening block party at a local
playground when gunfire rang
out. At least 17 people were
wounded in the crossfire. Today,
New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu
called on witnesses to come
forward. MITCH LANDRIEU (D),
Mayor of New Orleans, Louisiana:
Here's the message to the guys
who did the shooting last night.
You can't run, you can't hide.
We're going to find you. We're
going to prosecute you. We're
going to hold you accountable,
and we're going to put you
behind bars for our safety and
yours. But, in order to do this,
we need the community. There is
only so much the police can do.
We need the community to help us
take back the streets. GWEN
IFILL: All of the victims are
listed in stable condition. They
suffered either direct gunshot
wounds or were grazed by
bullets. In business news, the
pharmaceutical giant Pfizer
announced plans to merge with
Allergan, creating the world's
largest drugmaker. The $160
billion deal means Pfizer will
slash its corporate tax bill by
moving its New York headquarters
to Dublin, Ireland, where
Allergan is based. The
tax-saving ploy is known as
corporate inversion, which the
Obama administration has tried
to crack down on. On Wall Street
today, stocks gave up their
early gains in late afternoon
trading. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 31
points to close above 17792. The
Nasdaq fell two points. And the
S&P 500 also dropped two. Still
to come on the "NewsHour":
strategies to defeat the Islamic
State; fear-mongering or foreign
policy, our Politics Monday
discussion; tobacco's role in
treating Ebola, and much more.
The Paris attacks have reignited
the debate over how the United
States and other nations should
respond to a global terror
organization that's expanding
its targets beyond Iraq and
Syria. This week, France's
president is seeking additional
help from both the U.S. and
Russia. BARACK OBAMA, President
of the United States: Our
coalition will not relent. GWEN
IFILL: Traveling in Malaysia
yesterday, President Obama
pledged to take the fight to the
Islamic State. The terror
attacks in Paris, which led to a
wider European alert, follow 16
months of airstrikes against
ISIS targets in Iraq and Syria.
The assault slowed the group's
territorial expansion, but the
president insists U.S.
involvement will not include
direct ground combat. BARACK
OBAMA: Destroying ISIL is not
only a realistic goal. We're
going to get it done, and we're
going to pursue it with every
aspect of American power. The
United States will continue to
lead this global coalition. We
are intensifying our strategy on
all fronts with local partners
on the ground. GWEN IFILL: The
U.S. role in battling ISIS has
evolved in recent months. There
are more than 3,000 American
troops in Iraq providing
logistical training and combat
advice. American and Kurdish
commandos stormed an ISIS prison
in Iraq last month, rescuing
dozens of men. And, earlier this
month, the president announced
that 50 U.S. special operations
troops would be heading to
Syria. But the U.S. policy of
incremental involvement has been
questioned by the president's
political opponents and even by
some of his former appointees.
Two former defense secretaries
weighed in yesterday on whether
the president is focusing on the
right target and with the right
amount of force. LEON PANETTA,
Former U.S. Secretary of
Defense: The U.S. has to lead in
this effort, because what we
have learned a long time ago is,
if the United States doesn't
lead, nobody else will. We are
going to have to commit
additional resources to this
effort. We're hitting some
targets, but airstrikes alone
are not going to win here. CHUCK
HAGEL, Former U.S. Defense
Secretary: Assad is a very bad
guy. There are bad guys all over
the world. But I think it's
pretty clear that ISIS
represents the real threat to
our country, to the world. GWEN
IFILL: President Obama is
scheduled meet with French
President Francois Hollande
tomorrow to discuss the
coalition's next steps. So what
should the U.S. do and what
shouldn't it do? We have two
views. Former U.S. Ambassador to
Iraq James Jeffrey served in the
infantry, and he is now a
distinguished fellow at the
Washington Institute. And John
Mearsheimer, a West Point
graduate and former Air Force
officer, he writes extensively
on strategic issues and is a
political science professor at
the University of Chicago.
Welcome to you both, gentlemen.
JAMES JEFFREY, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Iraq: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Jim Jeffrey, let's
break this up into two parts,
the military and diplomatic
options. We hear a lot about
boots on the ground, commitment
of U.S. forces. Is that the only
thing we should be thinking
about? Is that where the debate
is right now? JAMES JEFFREY: In
terms of taking down ISIS as a
state and as an army, we have to
go on the offensive. That
requires ground troops. We have
tried for 15 months to create a
set of ground troops from the
units and entities and forces on
the ground that we have. It
isn't working all that well. We
don't have the time to keep
trying to do this. Some
insertion of U.S. forces, both
as advisers, special forces and
some ground maneuver units are
absolutely necessary to move
this forward. GWEN IFILL:
Quantify what you mean by some.
JAMES JEFFREY: Well, General
Jack Keane in congressional
testimony on the 18th talked
about two brigades to be
deployed, and that would be
about 10,000 combat troops to
stand by to move forward if
needed as we try this expanded
incremental approach that the
president is suggesting. GWEN
IFILL: John Mearsheimer, this is
called having skin in the game,
theoretically. What are the
opportunities for that and what
are the risks? JOHN MEARSHEIMER,
University of Chicago: Well, I
think there is virtually no
chance that we're going to put
large-scale ground forces in
Syria, and President Obama has
made it clear that he's not
going to do that. And the
principal reason is you would
have to put a lot of ground
troops in to defeat ISIS. And
there is no question that if you
put 100,000, 150,000 troops in
there, you could defeat ISIS,
but then you run into the
what-next question. What are we
going to do, stay in there and
occupy the place? And the end
result will be dealing with
insurgents, won't know how to
get out and will just make a bad
situation worse. So it's quite
clear to me that there is no way
we can defeat ISIS from the air
or with ground forces. And,
therefore, we have to find some
sort of diplomatic solution.
GWEN IFILL: Well, before we get
to the diplomatic, what are the
options here? Are we talking
about occupation? Is that
inevitable? JOHN MEARSHEIMER:
No, occupation is not
inevitable. And I don't believe
we will end up occupying Syria,
because we have tried this
before, in both Afghanistan and
in Iraq, and it didn't turn out
very well. And we would be
remarkably foolish to try to
duplicate that task. And there
is no way we can win this one
with airpower alone. The only
hope is that Assad's forces can
be rebuilt, to the point where
they can deal with ISIS, and
then we can get out of the
region militarily. GWEN IFILL:
Let me ask you both this
question. You know that Francois
Hollande is coming to Washington
tomorrow, going to meet with the
president. What should he be
asking for? JAMES JEFFREY: What
he will be asking for is a far
more aggressive American
campaign against ISIS, because,
if he doesn't get a yes, an
affirmative answer to that, he's
going to in any case go off to
Moscow and ask the same thing of
Putin. Putin has perhaps
one-tenth of our military
capabilities, but Putin will
give him an affirmative on a
very aggressive campaign against
ISIS. So, we're going to have
that one way or the other. GWEN
IFILL: John Mearsheimer, what do
you think that Hollande should
be or will be asking for? JOHN
MEARSHEIMER: Well, first of all,
I think that what he should ask
for is a coalition that includes
the United States, the Russians,
Iran and a number of other
actors in the region to work for
the purposes of propping up the
Assad government. The only hope
we have here is to prop up Assad
and make him powerful enough
that he can deal with ISIS. That
way, we don't have to put in
ground forces. And the Russians
of course are not going to put
in ground forces themselves. So
the only hope is Assad. But the
principal problem we face is
that the United States is
incapable of working with the
Russians. We still continue to
pursue this policy where we're
trying to topple Assad and the
Russians are trying to support
Assad. This is crazy, because
we're working at cross-purposes
and, if anything, we're just
going to make the war worse and
that is going to play to ISIS'
advantage. I think Hollande
understands this. GWEN IFILL:
Let me stay with you, Mr.
Mearsheimer, for a moment,
because you brought up the
question of diplomatic
solutions. Do we have time to
pursue that? We're right in the
middle of this now. JOHN
MEARSHEIMER: Well, we really
have no choice. There is no
simple military solution. There
is nothing the Americans or the
Russians can do militarily to
win this, because we're not
willing to commit ground forces,
for good reasons. So, what we
have to do is, we have to work
with Assad and we have to create
a situation where he's powerful
enough to push back ISIS and
then work to get some sort of
peace settlement in the region.
It's going to be remarkably
difficult to do, in large part
because, as I said, the
Americans are incapable of
working with the Russians. GWEN
IFILL: Ambassador Jeffrey, let's
talk about this Assad question.
It's clear that we're not on the
same side of the discussion with
Russia on Assad. And you just
heard what Mr. Mearsheimer said
about, hey, listen, let's forget
about this idea of ousting Assad
for now. What do you think?
JAMES JEFFREY: Gwen, in this
business, we can never be
totally sure, but I'm about as
sure as I ever can be that, if
we tried to throw our weight
behind this unholy coalition of
Assad, the Russians and the
Iranians, we would ensure that
ISIS will not only survive, but
prosper, because the entire Arab
Sunni world and Turkey will
throw their weight against us on
this. This is a double-barreled
problem we have, the Assad
regime, which helped create ISIS
and is now supported by Russia
and Iran, and ISIS itself. The
way to do this is to keep Assad
out of the battle and take the
fight to ISIS. ISIS has 30,000
troops. We have about 200,000 or
300,000 of our allied troops,
but they don't have the
capability to take the offensive
without America leading. GWEN
IFILL: Let me ask you. And I
want to ask this also to Mr.
Mearsheimer. What is our
long-term or even our short-term
strategic objective in Syria?
Why should we be more involved?
JAMES JEFFREY: First of all...
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, I
think... JAMES JEFFREY: ... it's
in the center of the Middle
East. Secondly, we have allies
to the north in Turkey, to the
south in Israel and Jordan, and
we have extraordinary interests
that President Obama has
emphasized time and time again.
He acknowledges that we are
fighting a war against ISIS. His
goal is to destroy it. He said
that again yesterday. The
question is how to do that. And
our long-term goals are to try
to bring some kind of
resurrection of the state system
in these very, very fragile
countries, because they can't
stand up against these movements
otherwise. GWEN IFILL: John
Mearsheimer? JOHN MEARSHEIMER:
First of all, I don't believe
that the United States has any
strategic interest in Syria. I
think, from a strategic point of
view, Syria is an insignificant
country. It's not like Iraq or
Iran that have lots of oil.
Second, I think the principal
two reasons that we should want
to shut down this conflict as
soon as possible is, number one,
for humanitarian reasons -- this
is a human rights disaster --
and, secondly, because if we
don't stem the flow of refugees
into Europe, it's going to cause
all sorts of problems in Europe.
You can already see that
happening. So we have a
deep-seated interest, I think
not for strategic reasons, but
for human rights reasons and
because of Europe, to do what we
can to end this one as quickly
as possible. But I don't think
that's going to happen, because
I think the ambassador's view of
dealing with the Russians is
correct in the minds of most
Americans. And most people
disagree with what I say. And,
therefore, we won't work with
the Russians and we won't solve
this problem. It will only get
worse. More Syrians will die and
more refugees will go into
Europe. GWEN IFILL: Interesting
listening to you argue against
your own point of view there.
Professor Mearsheimer of the
University of Chicago, thank you
very much, and to Ambassador Jim
Jeffrey here in Washington. JOHN
MEARSHEIMER: Thank you. GWEN
IFILL: The debate over what role
the U.S. should play in the
fight against ISIS has also
become central to the 2016
campaign. But how are the
candidates talking about it?
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports. LISA
DESJARDINS: Welcome to campaign
national security, with the
Islamic State group at the
center. SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: They are
growing. They're in Afghanistan.
ISIS is now on the ground in
Afghanistan recruiting Taliban
fighters away from the Taliban.
They're radical killers. And
either they win or we win. LISA
DESJARDINS: Many candidates,
like Marco Rubio today in Iowa,
are pouncing on fears about ISIS
to flex ideological and
political muscle. Republicans in
particular have strong
motivation. In a new
ABC/"Washington Post" poll, when
asked for their top issue, just
18 percent of voters who lean
Democratic named terrorism. The
number was more than twice as
high, 42 percent, for those
leaning Republican. Both volume
and controversy are increasing.
Speaking in Alabama over the
weekend, Donald Trump tried to
connect American Muslims with
9/11. DONALD TRUMP (R),
Presidential Candidate: I
watched when the World Trade
Center came tumbling down. And I
watched in Jersey City, New
Jersey, where thousands and
thousands of people were
cheering as that building was
coming down. LISA DESJARDINS:
Sunday, Trump was challenged on
that point by ABC's George
Stephanopoulos. GEORGE
STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC News: You
know, the police say that didn't
happen. And all those rumors
have been on the Internet for
some time. So did you misspeak
yesterday? DONALD TRUMP: It did
happen. I saw it. It was on
television. I saw it. GEORGE
STEPHANOPOULOS: You saw that
with your own eyes? LISA
DESJARDINS: Fellow candidate and
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie said Sunday he did not
remember Muslims celebrating
9/11 in his state. There is
mistrust and concern. But it is
also complicated. In a new CBS
poll of Iowa Republicans, 74
percent supported sending ground
troops to fight ISIS, but less
than half said the Paris attacks
have any influence on their
vote. Meanwhile, Democrats like
Hillary Clinton are using
foreign policy and Republican's
rhetoric on refugees as their
own foil. She tweeted out over
the weekend: "Our values are
stronger than fear. Slamming the
door on refugees isn't who we
are." The war against ISIS is
hitting familiar lines in the
debate over national security.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins. GWEN IFILL: So, it's
Politics Monday. Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report and
Tamara Keith of NPR are here to
talk about it all. Let's start
with where Hillary Clinton left
off, talking about basically the
politics of fear. How much of
that is a major feature now of
this campaign, Amy? AMY WALTER,
The Cook Political Report: Well,
I think we're definitely hearing
a lot more about it because it's
in the news right now. And yet,
at the same time, what we know
about this campaign is that what
Republicans are talking about
and what's really important to
them in their primary is very
different from what Democrats
say is really important to them.
The issue of terrorism and
security has always been an
important issue for Republicans,
even before these attacks in
Paris. It's now, of course,
taking more import. Among
Democrats, the economy, health
care always a more important
issue. I think terrorism will
move up there now, but not to
the extent it is with
Republicans. And on the issue of
Syrian refugees, you ask
Republicans how they feel about
it, 80 percent say, we don't
want them here at all; 65
percent of Democrats say, we
should bring them in, so just
two entirely different worlds.
GWEN IFILL: There is definitely
an us vs. them theme emerging
that is in this campaign, at
least right this moment. Who's
playing it best or the most, I
should say? TAMARA KEITH,
National Public Radio: Well,
certainly, people like Donald
Trump is -- is playing it up big
time. Ben Carson is also playing
into that. But even Marco Rubio
came out with an ad where he
very clearly said this is a
fight of civilizations, this is
between the left and our ideals
and Islamic extremism on the
other side, of course, using the
term Islamic extremism and also
at the end of that ad saying
they want to attack us because
we want girls to go to school.
GWEN IFILL: But we just saw what
Amy said about the numbers; 83
percent of people in the CBS
poll, I guess -- CBS poll --
fear an imminent attack. So
maybe they're speaking in a real
way to voters' fears in a way
that counts. AMY WALTER: Well,
what they're speaking to right
now definitely -- and this is
especially true among
Republicans -- is to a base that
feels like this president has
not done the job necessary to
deal with terrorism, to deal
with security in any way, and
the frustration that they're
feeling that this has been sort
of this wishy-washy foreign
policy, there is no resolution,
it's all nebulous. That's why
when you hear Donald Trump
coming out with the -- this is
what we're going to do, we're
going to bomb the you-know-what
out of ISIS, we just need to
bomb the oil fields, it is going
to be easy, we just need to be
strong, it speaks to a
Republican electorate that feels
as if the president has sort of
squandered away American power.
TAMARA KEITH: And this at the
same time that President Obama
is saying, well, we just have to
stay the course, we can
intensify, but the strategy
needs to remain the strategy.
And that is not very satisfying.
If you are afraid, if you saw
the beheading videos before and
you are seeing this violence in
France, and you want something,
then bomb the expletive deleted
out of them is a lot more
satisfying than, well, the
strategy that many don't agree
with, we're going to stick with
it, but maybe intensify a
little. GWEN IFILL: And,
tonight, the State Department
puts out a worldwide travel
alert. Now we -- how does that
work, however, for Hillary
Clinton, because she's a former
State Department -- secretary of
state, worked in the Obama
administration? Yet polls say
two things. One is that they
think that she is strong. The
other is that they don't trust
her. TAMARA KEITH: And those --
she's had a trust issue for a
long time in her polling. She, I
think, feels like -- for
whatever reason, feels like she
is strongest when she is talking
about economic issues, talking
about empathizing with the
concerns of families. She gave a
big speech late last week about
her plan for ISIS. She came out
strong. She came out asking for
more than President Obama
wanted. She talked about no-fly
zones in Syria. She talked about
needing more special operations
ground forces to maybe even call
in airstrikes. So she went a
little bit further than the
president, but I think she would
be perfectly happy, for whatever
reason, mostly talking about
domestic issues, in part because
that's where the Democratic
electorate is. AMY WALTER: And,
in part -- I think's that's
exactly right -- and in part
because there is not a good
answer. GWEN IFILL: Yes. AMY
WALTER: And we saw it in the
debate, the last debate we had
for the Democrats. When asked
about ISIS, there wasn't a
really good answer out of
Hillary Clinton. When asked
about her role in Libya, there
wasn't a really good answer from
Hillary Clinton. GWEN IFILL: But
think about the conversation
we're actually having,
especially on the Republican
side, admittedly. We should
bloom the bleep out of them, we
should surveil mosques, we
should track refugees. Compare
that to what George W. Bush said
the following week after 9/11,
2001. We have a little bit of
it. GEORGE W. BUSH, Former
President of the United States:
These acts of violence against
innocents violate the
fundamental tenets of the
Islamic faith. And it's
important for my fellow
Americans to understand that.
The face of terror is not the
true faith of Islam. That's not
what Islam is all about. Islam
is peace. These terrorists don't
represent peace. They represent
evil and war. GWEN IFILL: Now
how things have changed,
especially for a party which
identified itself after its last
election as its goal for the
next election being more open
and tolerant. AMY WALTER: Right.
Now, to be fair, a lot of this
energy right now is coming from
one person, and that's Donald
Trump talking about mosques and
talking about celebration in the
streets of New Jersey when the
towers came down. That didn't
really happen. (CROSSTALK) GWEN
IFILL: Yes. AMY WALTER: But --
so a lot of that is coming
specifically from him. But I
think, to a broader point, where
you are hearing about a clash of
civilizations, radical Islam, it
is -- I think it goes back at
President Obama, and this real
deep disdain, frustration,
whatever you want to call it,
probably deeper, stronger word
than that, about the president's
handling of this issue, how he's
handled the Middle East, how
he's handled foreign policy. And
I think that's a lot of why the
rhetoric that you heard from
President Bush sounds very
different from the rhetoric of
the Republicans. And, remember,
the Republican Party, hard to
think, that was 2001, how much
further to the right Republicans
have moved and how much further
to the left the Democrats have
moved just in those 15 years.
TAMARA KEITH: And there is also
this element, though, that
George W. Bush was the
president. He was the leader of
the Republican Party. These
people are running for
president. Those are very
different motives. There's very
different things driving a
presidential candidate and a
president of the United States.
GWEN IFILL: Is it also part --
partly in the interest of some
of these candidates to wind this
into the immigration debate,
something which has really
worked for candidates like
Donald Trump, but not only
Donald Trump, also worked for
Ted Cruz, also worked for Marco
Rubio? AMY WALTER: Yes, there is
definitely a message that is
being sent that there are unsafe
people out there, and if you put
Democrats in charge, they are
not going to keep you safe.
Right? That's the number one job
that government is there to do.
It's the one thing that
Republicans can agree on, that
the role of government is to
keep people safe. They disagree
with a lot of the other roles of
government, but that one,
absolutely. And so what you're
going to see and the question I
think that you were raising
before is, how do you transition
from this kind of rhetoric in a
primary to going to a general
election, where you do have to
look presidential and unify the
country? We hear over and over
-- I'm sure you do, too -- from
voters the frustration they have
with the dysfunction in
Washington, the frustration they
have that we have a country
that's pulling apart. Who's
going to be the unifier?
(CROSSTALK) GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, we didn't even get to talk
about the Louisiana governor's
race, but we will get back to
that at another time. Amy Walter
and Tamara Keith, thank you both
very much. AMY WALTER: Thank
you. TAMARA KEITH: You're
welcome. GWEN IFILL: Stay with
us. Coming up on the "NewsHour":
story time as a method for
learning English; and from the
Bookshelf, "Black Flags," how
the rise of ISIS came to be.
But, first, we turn to the
search for a treatment for
Ebola. West Africa is still
dealing with the aftermath of
the worst outbreak of the
disease in recorded history.
Last week, Liberia reported a
handful of new cases, just
months after the World Health
Organization said the country
was free of the disease. And
this weekend, not one, but two
panels said the WHO needs to
substantially reform and change
the way it deals with
international health crises.
Special correspondent Mary Jo
Brooks has a report on the hunt
to finally stop the virus. MARY
JO BROOKS: It looks like an
ordinary greenhouse filled with
plants basking under light, but
at this facility just outside
Owensboro, Kentucky, the plants
themselves have become a labor
force, working around the clock
to manufacture a cure for Ebola.
HUGH HAYDON, CEO, Kentucky
Bioprocessing: These plants are
27 days old. MARY JO BROOKS:
Three days earlier, these plants
were injected with a genetic
blueprint for one of three
antibodies used in the
experimental drug ZMapp. Hugh
Haydon of Kentucky Bioprocessing
explains how it works. HUGH
HAYDON: The plant recognizes
that gene and its machinery
turns on and it starts to
manufacture that protein for us.
And it's really that simple. It
becomes a little bitty factory.
MARY JO BROOKS: ZMapp was still
in the developmental stage when
Ebola first broke out in West
Africa in March of 2014. The
disease has since claimed more
than 10,000 victims. But a
handful of people were
successfully tweeted with ZMapp,
including Dr. Kent Brantly. DR.
KENT BRANTLY, Ebola Survivor:
Today is a miraculous day. I am
thrilled to be alive, to be well
and to be reunited with my
family. MARY JO BROOKS: Since
then, the drug has being
undergoing clinical trials in
West Africa and the FDA has
granted it fast-track approval
status. Larry Zeitlin and Kevin
Whaley are the scientists from
San Diego who developed the
ZMapp antibodies, which were
designed to quickly attack the
Ebola virus. KEVIN WHALEY,
Developed ZMapp: In a vaccine,
you give a person a protein that
stimulates your own body to make
antibodies. In this case, we're
giving antibodies directly to
you, so your body doesn't have
to make them. LARRY ZEITLIN,
Developed ZMapp: And unlike the
vaccine, where it takes you
weeks to months to build up
protective immunity, as soon as
the antibodies are provided to
the patients, they're protected
against that disease. MARY JO
BROOKS: Speed is the name of the
game in fighting infectious
disease. And it is the reason
that Whaley and Zeitlin decided
to manufacture their drug using
plants, rather than the
traditional animal protein
method. They chose an Australian
relative the American tobacco
plant in a process that is quick
and relatively simple. Just
three weeks after the seeds go
into the soil, the plants are
mature enough to be dipped into
a liquid which contains proteins
to be replicated. The plants
grow those proteins for another
week, and then are harvested and
chopped up. The resulting green
liquid is filtered and tested
and, by day 40, it's ready to be
shipped out. HUGH HAYDON: It's a
very fast system. And if it's
faster, it costs a little bit
less on the front end
particularly. It gives you a lot
of flexibility in terms of
developing a product. You get
your protein. You look at your
protein. Is it what you wanted?
If it doesn't have the exact
characteristics that you want,
you do it again. You reengineer
it and do it again until you get
exactly where you want to be.
MARY JO BROOKS: The system of
biofarming could be useful for a
number of drug therapies that
must ramp up production quickly.
The Canadian company Medicago
uses tobacco plants to
manufacture flu vaccine, which
needs to change seasonally. At
its large greenhouse in
Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina,
workers and robots tend to the
growing plants. DR. MICHAEL
SCHUNK, Vice President of
Operations, Medicago: They
produce the vaccine over about a
week. MARY JO BROOKS: So it's a
very quick, efficient process.
DR. MICHAEL SCHUNK: It's very
quick, very efficient, very
adaptable. MARY JO BROOKS:
Michael Schunk is the vice
president of operations. DR.
MICHAEL SCHUNK: This plant
technology can respond in about
half the time of the traditional
flu manufacturing technologies,
so that's what started us into
the flu, and we have just
continued to grow with that.
MARY JO BROOKS: Medicago is in
the final stage of clinical
trials to receive FDA approval
for its flu vaccine. Once
granted, the company says it
will be able to make 30 million
doses a year. It has also begun
producing an Ebola drug similar
to ZMapp. Both Medicago and
Kentucky Bioprocessing received
Defense Department money to
develop their pharmaceuticals.
The hope is that the technology
could be used to quickly counter
a pandemic or bioterrorism
attack. DR. MICHAEL SCHUNK: This
facility is about 27,000 square
feet. MARY JO BROOKS: But
Michael Schunk says the
technology holds promise for all
kinds of drugs. He's especially
optimistic that developing
nations will use this method to
manufacture vaccines on their
own soil, since the cost of
building the facilities is much
less than traditional drug
factories. DR. MICHAEL SCHUNK:
This is not a very complicated
technology. It's certainly
transportable. Every country has
greenhouses, so every country
has the potential to have a
facility that can be used to
produce vaccines that maybe are
more a concern to that
particular country. MARY JO
BROOKS: Schunk and other
biofarming proponents predict
that soon drugs to treat herpes,
HIV, MRSA, and other infectious
diseases will routinely be grown
in plants. Of course, the irony
of using a version of tobacco to
save lives is not lost on
anyone, including Hugh Haydon.
HUGH HAYDON: There is some
irony. There is no question
about that. But what our
business is about and what we
have -- what we have always been
about is using the plant to
create things and to do positive
things. Our focus has been
biopharmaceuticals and using the
plant to yield those kind of
proteins. And it works really
well for that. MARY JO BROOKS:
Biopharmaceuticals, plants that
one day could be used routinely
to wipe out infectious diseases.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Mary
Jo Brooks in Owensboro,
Kentucky. GWEN IFILL: Last week,
we took you to a middle school
in Houston that's trying to
bridge the education gap for
refugee children newly arrived
in the U.S. Tonight, we return
to Texas to examine another
program that's helping some of
the state's youngest newcomers
learn English. April Brown has
our American Graduate report, a
public media initiative funded
by the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting. MARY JO BROOKS:
Charlie Lewong (ph) may be short
on English skills right now, but
he's giving it his best shot.
Charlie, whose family speaks
Vietnamese at home, has just
created his own medieval world
inside this classroom at the
Gabriela Mistral Center for
Early Childhood in Houston. At 4
years old, Charlie is already
working on his second language.
And that's even before he has
mastered his first. It's
something he has in common with
nearly all of the kids he goes
to school with. LORI ESPINOZA,
Gabriela Mistral Center for
Early Childhood: What is he
doing? STUDENT: He's getting the
keys. MARY JO BROOKS: This
classroom is where Lori Espinoza
brings stories to life, as her
pre-K students are eager to go
along for the ride. Espinoza
teaches at the school's OWL Lab,
the Oral and Written Language
Laboratory, which uses
storytelling and dramatic play
to get kids talking. It builds
on research that shows a
storytelling curriculum can
significantly improve vocabulary
and literacy. That's especially
important for students whose
families don't speak language at
home, where language skills
first develop. LORI ESPINOZA: We
have like over 20 languages
represented in our school.
Children here speak English,
Spanish, Italian, Arabic. MARY
JO BROOKS: Because these
youngsters are new to school and
many new to the country, the
classroom is designed so kids
feel safe and comfortable. LORI
ESPINOZA: The classroom looks
super homey. That's intentional.
We have wicker baskets. We have
nice carpets that are a warm
feeling, because we want
children to come in and feel
like this could be their living
room, so the children feel more
at ease and more like they're
just hanging out with family.
DEBBIE PAZ, Rice University: We
know that oral language is the
foundation for everything that
will happen later on. It's what
they will need for reading and
writing later on. MARY JO
BROOKS: Debbie Paz is the
associate director of early
literacy and bilingual programs
at Houston's Rice University,
which worked with the school to
create the OWL Lab five years
ago. DEBBIE PAZ: So, if we fill
the room with things that get
them excited that they want talk
to us about, there's more of a
chance that we're going to
develop those language skills.
APRIL BROWN: Different stations
around the room allow children
to make choices about what to do
and many encourage them to
explore different ways to tell a
story. Goldilocks and the Three
Bears, for example, can be acted
out with costumes and props in
one area. WOMAN: Mama bear made
some hot porridge. APRIL BROWN:
Or with little dolls in a
somewhat miniature home. LORI
ESPINOZA: A huge component of
this room is giving children
enough freedom, enough things
that they want to do, so that
they can build that
self-regulation. And so I think
that independence is huge. Their
self-esteem gets higher and
their motivation to learn goes
up. APRIL BROWN: One station in
particular builds on the first
word many children learn through
what's called environmental
print, like the names of
restaurants or stores. LORI
ESPINOZA: That's the print
that's all over the place, that
is just plastered on walls,
science room buildings,
everywhere. That may not be
intentionally placed there for
children to read, but it's
there. APRIL BROWN: On their
regular visitation days, the
school shares lessons with
parents on how to use those
words to get kids talking.
Debbie Paz says parents are also
encouraged to share their own
stories about the culture in
their homeland or how they made
the journey to America, whether
or not they speak English.
DEBBIE PAZ: They're not
necessarily readers and writers,
but they want -- they have a
story to tell. And they want you
to hear that story, because it's
something that they're proud of.
APRIL BROWN: And you hope their
children tell the stories too.
DEBBIE PAZ: Exactly. Exactly.
APRIL BROWN: Four-year-old Sujon
(ph) is Gursharam Salh's second
daughter to spend time in this
classroom. Salh says after
visiting the OWL Lab, Sujon now
has much higher expectations for
story time at home. GURSHARAM
SALH, Parent: Making your voice
high or low, that is not good
enough. They want you to like go
around the room and do walks
around and actions. APRIL BROWN:
The OWL Lab was never intended
to benefit only students at this
school. Because it's a
laboratory, many teachers from
all over the Houston Independent
School District come here to
learn these techniques. Some
come in for short professional
development sessions and others,
like Carin Malmer, visit
regularly as part of Rice
University's Early Literacy
Leadership Academy. On this day,
Malmer came in to learn new ways
to get parents involved and
excited about their children's
education. CARIN MALMER,
Teacher: Parents have a really
important role in the child's
education. And so, with this
program and with things that I'm
learning with the early literacy
program, I want to bring them
and make them feel important as
well as feel comfortable to
volunteer. APRIL BROWN: Of
course, the W. in OWL Lab stands
for writing. And children write
their stories, with adults
taking dictation. LORI ESPINOZA:
You just see children just so
willing to take risk, so excited
to learn language, so excited to
share stories in their home
language and even attempt it in
English for those
English-language learners. APRIL
BROWN: English-language learners
like Charlie, who Espinoza says
couldn't speak a record of it
when he came to school. For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm April Brown
in Houston. GWEN IFILL: Finally
tonight, we return to the
challenge of ISIS, but this time
to a look at its beginnings. The
story is told in a new book,
"Black Flags: The Rise of ISIS."
Author Joby Warrick has covered
national security and the Middle
East for The Washington Post. He
talked with Jeffrey Brown at
this weekend's Miami Book Fair.
JEFFREY BROWN: Welcome to you.
JOBY WARRICK, Author, "Black
Flags: The Rise of ISIS": Thank
you, Jeffrey. JEFFREY BROWN:
Could not be more current, of
course. We will get to current
events, but you are, in this
book, looking at the backstory
of what led to today. JOBY
WARRICK: Yes. I think a lot of
people -- to a lot of people,
that ISIS seemed to come out of
nowhere last year. And the truth
is, there is a very long and
complicated story behind this
organization. It's quite
different from al-Qaida. It's
always been a different stripe,
but its story goes back into
prisons in Jordan in the 1990s
and with individuals who became
radicalized and became very
different from this message of
al-Qaida about sort of driving
out their Western powers from
the Middle East. But they wanted
to create a caliphate, this
powerful idea. (CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: From the
beginning? JOBY WARRICK: From
the beginning. It was kind of
something that morphed as they
went along, but the idea was to
do something here and now, not
worry about far enemies, not
worry about the Western powers,
but try to create this holy
state, this holy empire. JEFFREY
BROWN: As with al-Qaida, it
began, though, in jails, in
prisons, right, with a small
core? JOBY WARRICK: Yes. That is
interesting, because a lot of
the founders of al-Qaida, as you
say, Zawahri and others, came
out of Egyptian prisons. JEFFREY
BROWN: Egyptian prisons, right?
JOBY WARRICK: Yes. JEFFREY
BROWN: Yes, also Jordan. JOBY
WARRICK: The same pedigree and
some of the same sort of beliefs
and sort of radicalization
process was fairly similar.
JEFFREY BROWN: A lot of
confusion and uncertainty about
its history. A lot of confusion
about what just it is. How do
you define ISIS? JOBY WARRICK:
Well, ISIS, you know, it's
interesting, in that it's a
group that sort of latches on to
a few central themes that
identify it. One is this idea of
creating the caliphate as sort
of the immediate and also
long-term goal. This is
something they want to do. And
there is also this embracing of
violence for its own sake. This
is not strategic violence
sometimes, but it's just to
shock and awe or to horrify. And
they use violence and they use
media very deliberately to
intimidate to enemies and also
to excite their base to get
other radicals to join their
movement and to help them.
JEFFREY BROWN: So when we see
the beheadings, of course, we
see the destroying ancient
sites, those are for effect?
JOBY WARRICK: Yes, there is a
message there. They're not
trying to win hearts and minds
of people around the world and
not even the Muslim community.
They're looking at provoking.
And that's what they're very
good at doing. JEFFREY BROWN:
How did they get from -- the
story you're telling is how they
got from Jordan prisons to an
international organization. JOBY
WARRICK: Yes. JEFFREY BROWN: Was
there a key moment along the way
when -- that you can now look
back and say, OK, now this is
the real beginning of this
group? JOBY WARRICK: There's a
key individual. And there's a
terrorist whose name was Abu
Musab al Zarqawi, who was a
Jordanian terrorist, a fairly
minor figure, but he ends up
becoming important for two
reasons. One was because the
United States, the Bush
administration in particular,
decided to make him kind of a
poster child for this connection
between al-Qaida and Saddam
Hussein. They picked on some
very flimsy evidence that
suggested a connection. And they
actually put his picture in
front of the United Nations in
2003 arguing for invasion of
Iraq. Turns out the evidence was
wrong, he had nothing to do with
Saddam Hussein. He had nothing
to do really with al-Qaida, but
it was -- it made him famous. It
gave him a platform. Suddenly,
he became an international hero
in the jihadist community. And
then immediately after that, the
invasion takes place. Zarqawi
moves into Iraq and starts this
insurgency, which really becomes
the force that almost drove the
U.S. to defeat in Iraq. JEFFREY
BROWN: This is part of -- a big
part of the stories, the actions
or misactions of the U.S. and
other Western governments. Were
those -- that kind of thing an
act of omission or commission,
or how do you see it? JOBY
WARRICK: Yes. There's multiple
acts of commission I think in
the early days, and it was not
just the invasion itself, which
gives people like Zarqawi a
platform and a reason to call
others like him around the world
to help out. But also there was
a security vacuum that emerged
in Iraq in the early days, where
the Baathists are disbanded, the
army is sent home. And so
Zarqawi, this fanatic, has sort
of a willing army of Iraqis
ready to help him. And,
together, they sort of blend the
fanaticism and the military and
bureaucrat professionals ends up
becoming this force called
al-Qaida in Iraq, and that is
the core of what is now ISIS.
It's the same group today.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then stir in
the Syrian civil war. JOBY
WARRICK: Absolutely. So,
actually, toward the late 2000s,
Zarqawi's movement was on its
heels. Zarqawi himself was
killed. They were kind of driven
underground. There was no real
sense that they had any future.
Then Arab spring happens. Then
the Syrian civil war takes
place. And suddenly there's a
whole new opportunity. They
essentially get their rebirth in
the ashes of the Syrian state.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the key
questions now, of course, is how
organized is ISIS? Who is -- is
it centrally run or are these
cells out there? JOBY WARRICK:
Well, they do have this powerful
central organization. It's
remarkable to me to see how good
they are at things like
logistics, how good they are at
getting supplies and moving
recruits to various places,
getting suicide bombers to take
on these incredible missions.
But, also, they are very good at
inspiring people in other parts
of the world to kind of take up
the same mantle. And we don't
always know how well-connected
some of the local groups are to
ISIS central. There is clearly
at least some messaging through
propaganda and some actual
coordination as well. JEFFREY
BROWN: Messaging through
propaganda? JOBY WARRICK: Yes.
So, ISIS -- for example, this
recent Paris attack, so this
individual Abdelhamid Abaaoud in
Paris, who is the ringleader of
the attack, he gets sort of
chided publicly by ISIS'
propaganda ministers in Syria,
saying, do something in Paris,
these Westerners have to pay for
the things they're doing do us.
And so that becomes, we think,
part of what drove him to commit
this crime. JEFFREY BROWN: You
used the word chided. That's an
interesting... JOBY WARRICK:
Yes. There was this... JEFFREY
BROWN: It's not order. It's not
like could you -- why don't you
-- chiding? JOBY WARRICK: Yes.
There may be some of that too.
But it feels like there is
almost some shaming that goes
on, and you see this repeatedly
by ISIS central in their
propaganda messages. They used
their videos which they put out
publicly to call upon jihadis in
Paris, do something. You know,
do anything. And they make the
same message for like-minded
people in America and Russia and
other places like that, kind of
egging or goading local
affiliates to take action.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did anything
about Paris surprise you? JOBY
WARRICK: You know what? We
weren't totally surprised that
they would lash out outside the
region. Their focus has mostly
been Syria and Iraq, because
they have their hands full right
now. They're being attacked from
multiple sides. Everybody is
bombing them. You have the
Syrians and the Kurds -- Syrian
Arabs and Kurds coming after
them on the ground. JEFFREY
BROWN: All right, the book is
"Black Flags: The Rise of ISIS."
Joby Warrick, thanks so much.
JOBY WARRICK: Thank you, Jeff.
GWEN IFILL: That conversation
was recorded this weekend at the
Miami Book Fair. You can find
more PBS coverage of the fair,
including additional author
interviews, at bookviewnow.org.
A professor from Upstate New
York is using technology to
transform the world, especially
for young people in need of
limbs. He shares his experience
in his own words as part of this
trip down innovation trail, a
series of reports on the economy
and technology in Upstate New
York. This report was produced
by WXXI in Rochester. JON
SCHULL, Rochester Institute of
Technology: I'm Jon Schull. I'm
a research scientist here at the
Rochester Institute of
Technology, where I'm in the
Center for Magic. RIT is a
center for media, arts, games,
interaction and creativity,
where I run a lab on access and
collaboration technology, which
is how I got started founding an
organization called e-NABLE --
e-NABLE. And what we do is, we
make mechanical hands for
children who are missing fingers
using 3-D printers, and we give
them away for free. Just like
printing a document, you press
print and the 3-D printer starts
building this object that you
designed on the screen by
putting down tiny thin layers of
plastic like a glue gun, layer
by layer by layer, building it
up to make the thing. A
prosthetic arm these days costs
about $40,000. One in 2,000 kids
are born with some kind of an
arm or hand abnormality. They
don't get prosthetics because it
makes no sense to spend $40,000
on something they're going to
outgrow in a year. With a 3-D
printer, we can start making
these things almost for nothing.
Instead of $40,000, you can do
it with about $10 or $20 worth
of plastic. And it's not as
sturdy as a $40,000 titanium
artificial arm. On the other
hand, if you outgrow it or break
it, you can make another. One of
the interesting things about
this project is that the kids
that we're making these hands
for are becoming inventors and
designers in their own right. I
was working with Derek a few
months ago. And I was showing
him this artificial arm that we
are working on and explaining
that we needed kids to work with
us as test pilots and as
collaborators. And while I'm
talking to him, he put two of
these models together and he
said, "I would like my arm to be
this long." So, Derek now has an
arm which is extra long. He can
pick things up off the floor
without bending over and he can
reach to the highest shelf,
higher than his classmates,
because he has got an extra long
arm, the so-called Derek Arm,
which just goes to show that
7-year-olds and 9-year-olds can
play a really important role
helping us invent the solutions
for other kids and other
grownups in the future. You
know, disability is a funny
word. Disability means you can't
do something. It's not a
disease, and it's not even a
property of a person. A person
doesn't have a disability. A
person has a disability if he's
in a world where he can't do
something. If I didn't have
glasses in a world in which
there's lot of fine print, I
would be disabled. As it is, I'm
just a guy who wears glasses.
The technology of eyeglasses
turned nearsightedness and
farsightedness into a nuisance,
when it used to be a disability.
New technology is going to turn
things like you're missing a
hand or you can't move your body
or you have brain damage into a
nuisance, rather than a
disability. GWEN IFILL: On the
"NewsHour" online, this week,
we're celebrating the 100th
anniversary of Albert Einstein's
theory of general relativity. We
asked three physicists to
explain how Einstein's seminal
work has influenced today's
scientists. You can find that on
our home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And finally tonight, we want to
note a correction. Due to an
editing error, a sequence in a
report last Thursday about
funding for ISIS included
footage of Russian airstrikes on
ISIS oil resources, instead of
the U.S. airstrikes referenced
in the script. Keen observers in
our "NewsHour" audience picked
up on the mistake and alerted us
to it. And we regret the error.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. On Tuesday: a report on
the impact of pesticides on bee
pollination. Join us online and
again here tomorrow evening. For
all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.